I am increasingly treating meditation as being solely about constriction and the constriction being a very simple matter. At first you have some obvious tension in some muscles and you relax. Then you continue a bit with your relaxation and direct your attention to different places. At each location you might find a bit but after a minute or two there is no obvious tension in your body. But there is nonobvious tension, you are constricted. Your body is a field within which particles or waves or whatever can move more or less freely. You think they are moving as they are moving. You have no experience of the absolute levels of constriction, you have no way of noticing. What you do notice is the rise and fall in constriction, and you can notice where it is happening. At least you can see the result of this rise and fall, hopefully mostly a fall. Maybe you notice as tingling in your face, a lightweight temporary growth of a rhizome-like structure penetrating an area of your scalp, appearing and disappearing within a second or two. It feels like you are less constricted there for a second. I don't think so, I think you're witnessing the effects of deconstriction somewhere. You may be witnessing the small tiny avalances of deconstriction somewhere. Have you not noticed it before in other settings? You felt like you were completely alright, but then something causes you to totally relax. Or at least relax a bit more, because why were you ever sure that you were "completely relaxed". Maybe you never tried being completely relaxed. Maybe it is not something you just do. Maybe you don't have a chill day or a not so chill day. Maybe it is something very subtle. It is not so clear why one always feels great. I am increasingly treating feeling great as solely about constriction and constriction being a very simple matter. Feeling great is just about how well the energy can flow in your body. Smiling is just about how little is blocking the pathway from sponatenous thoughts of happiness (that arise from the dream voices in your mind that are playing jokes and pranks on you all the time) to move all the way to your face. Constriction is measured in newton you know. Forces everywhere at every point in this complicated topological space point in this direction and that direction. If they every said you would have trouble trying to comb a hairy ball then wait till you see the space on which my vector field of tension lives. No shit you will feel a cascade of release and feel as if there are more global patterns at play all the way down your spine some times. Tanha is measured in kilonewton, at least thats the way psychiatrist's will measure it. And what does this have to do with actual muscle tension. Nobody seems to be able to give a good answer. It might not really matter a lot. For a start just treat all of it as being about constriction and constriction being a simple matter.

I am additcted. To a bunch of stuff, but specific forms of constriction especially. Some things get you excited. How do they get you excited. They get you excited by constricting in a certain pattern. Why does it feel good? Because feeling good is not about the absolute levels of constriction, that's what peace is about. Peace is not so additive as feeling good in the simple sense. I might be contradicting myself here but this is not my intention. When I say one can feel great and that this is mostly about not being constricted I am meaning something else than feeling good. Feeling good is what you do when you drink coffee or take methylphenidate before you get your crash. Feeling good there is some kind of arousal intertwined with dopamine release or something that has a bunch of completely forgivable and innocuous physiological usecases, however that does not change what they are: You are getting excited about something, however concrete or abstract, you are constricting your whole system in relation to that something, and you are in this way fixing it and deriving pleasure from this not in an abstract sense but from this very constriction. You can feel it in your thighs, you can feel it up your spine. It feels like release but it isn't. Something about the pattern in the vector field is very similar to the patterns of release. But release is also not what you are after. Release has the effect of feeling good but this feeling good is not what you are after, you should be after the effects of this release, of which the actue feeling good is only a side effect. The feeling good of this dopamine-intertwined arousal is as I said a completely normal thing, that does not make it without its problems. The problem is very concrete: This constriction is happening in response to a specific situation that is manifestly temporary. It is not that deep, but it is literally just a temporary thing that requires temporary increased release of energy. The constriction should not remain. And here something becomes weird: Why does it feel so different when this pattern will have to change than when you feel the bliss associated with release? What does this pattern change feel like: It is not only that is feels like something, it is the essense, the substance of the badness of the feeling. It is discouragement, it is the loss of excitement, it is hopelessness, it is frustration. These are not results of having to readapt to the state of the world after having constricted around a temporary phenomenon, they simply are what it is to readapt in this way. If a person takes cocaine and suddenly gets super excited about creating a global business empire, he is bound to feel good, it makes every sense in the world that the reward system will reward him for every joule of energy he invests in scheming towards his great triumph. However, once the drug wears off and there and the excitability of the relevant brain regions diminishes, this state can no longer be maintained. The state that was being maintained by constricting the world to fit with the grand plan can no longer be upeheld, it would require an enormous amount of effort to conquer the whole world in this way. With such grand goals it would probably be very suitable to stay up very late and scheme. But the system changes, the obivousness of the mismatch between the available energy resources and the crazy amount of energy resources that have been budgetted not only for now but for many days or years into the future in order to attain the business empire becomes more and more clear. It is time for the great reckoning. This is not only the case for the guy on coke. There is always a reckoning. I am addicted, I am addicted to a bunch of stuff, but special forms of constriction especially. And the causes of such constriction. It has been years since I learned that coffee does something weird for me and that I am better of without it. Still it gives me exactly the constriction of the form that will allow bliss to arise in my body, excitement to form around specific objects of my attention. Maybe not a business empire, but still something where my system is making an ambitious budget, is deciding to spend outside of its means, only to reconfigure in a semi-great reckoning.

What is the solution? Are we doomed forever to live in a low-arousal unambitious state of mind while telling ourselves that at least we have some peace of mind from avoiding the subtle horrors of the reckoning. No: I am increasingly treating meditation as being solely about constriction and constriction being a very simple matter. Certain patterns of living, certain lifestyles offer a real alternative to basing energy on constriction. Low arousal and unambitious laziness is paradoxically enough arising from certain kinds of constriction. This is why it is messed up to try to solve it by constricting. You don't need more arousal, you just need some areas of our brain and system to be less aroused. They are wasting your energy, so you don't have any left.