# microintelligent services
microservices we know. prompts we know. the goal of a well-designed framework of microintelligent services should be to make it easy to create, maintain, change, debug and make use of services that combine what i will call crystalized and semi-crystalized computation. as explored in the document on self-structuring generation/ self-controlled flow prompts define a language for conjuring control flows with different degrees on structure. ordinary programming is what i will call fully crystalizing computation, the result are crystals. the grand arch of computing is to tap the potentatial of computation by crystalizing the substance of ever larger domains imposing structure on it. there is no value judgement here. there is always a gradient of crystalization. even though code is the far end of this spectrum the code is active in machines, maintained by people, failing, embedded in organization that are responsive themselves. we are all too aware of this, the metaphors of organizations as machines, the grand ideals of web3 with organizations based on code etc, social critique and anlysis of the instrumentality of political and legal structures, capitalism's unrelenting application of rationality to every domain of life etc.

microintelligent services is about human computer interaction. it is about making the power of crystalization available to humans, we need the ability to conjure up services based on ideas, we do not care about them being fully crystalized from the beginning, we do not care about them being rationally designed, we just want to be able to think and organize information, apply algorithmic thinking to this information, transfer the information to others, we want to be able to be architects without focusing on the details without being too concerned about efficiency, the details, but we want it to work, we want the computer to be alive to us, we dont want programs, we want living processes that remain with us.